# Clojure의 Type.



* 기존 type에 새로운 method를, 그리고 기존 method에 새로운 type을


* 동적으로 type이 지정된다고 해서 Clojure에 type이 없는 것은 아니다.
* 단지 모든 type을 미리 선언하지 않아도 될 뿐이다.



## Expression Problem

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expression_problem
* http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/expression/expression.txt
* [expression_problem.md](expression_problem.md)

* 기존 코드를 재컴파일하지 않으면서, 정적 유형을 안전하게 유지하면서 새 케이스를 데이터 유형에 추가하고 데이터 유형 전체에 새 함수를 추가 할 수 있는가.
* OOP언어 대부분은 상속을 통해, 혹은 몽키패칭을 통해, Expression Problem을 해결하려고 한다.
* OOP 언어를 이용하면, 기존 인터페이스를 상속받아 새로운 type을 쉽게 추가할 수 있다.
* functional 언어를 사용하면, 기존 type에 적용시킬 수 있는 새로운 함수(인터페이스)를 쉽게 추가할 수 있다.

* [기존 클래스에 메서드를 확장하기](http://blog.dahlia.kr/post/26202408156)
* [defrecord with "inheritance"](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/clojure/mr-o9sRyiZ0)



## Clojure에서는?


```
 Clojure is a functional language
    that explicitly supports programs as models
    and provides robust and easy-to-use facilities for managing identity and state in a single process in the face of concurrency.

 Exactly one state at any point in time. And that state is a true value, i.e. it never changes.
  If an identity appears to change, it is because it becomes associated with different state values over time. This is the Clojure model.

 - http://clojure.org/state
```



### Local State
mutable?

* http://scattered-thoughts.net/blog/2014/02/17/local-state-is-harmful/
* http://blog.circleci.com/local-state-global-concerns/



### abstraction
```
 Clojure eschews the traditional object-oriented approach of creating a new data type for each new situation,
  instead preferring to build a large library of functions on a small set of types

  - http://clojure.org/multimethods
 ```


```
The protocols and datatypes features add powerful and flexible mechanisms for abstraction and data structure definition with no compromises vs the facilities of the host platform.

 - http://clojure.org/datatypes
```


```
프로토콜은 강력한 도구로 원래의 코드를 수정하지 않고도 이름이 충돌하지 않게 기존 클래스에 메소드를 새로 삽입할 수 있는 기능을 효과적으로 제공한다.
그러나 프로토콜은 Expression Problem의 절반, 즉 Wadler 테이블의 "새 열"에 대한 문제점만 해결할 뿐이다.
Clojure에서는 "새 행"을 테이블에 어떻게 추가할까?
해답은 바로 데이터 유형에 있다. 오브젝트 지향 환경에서는 데이터 유형이 클래스와 동일한 역할을 한다.

 - expression problem
```

* https://github.com/clojure/clojure/blob/master/src/clj/clojure/core/protocols.clj
* https://github.com/omcljs/om/blob/master/src/main/om/core.cljs
* https://github.com/clojure/core.async/blob/master/src/main/clojure/clojure/core/async/impl/channels.clj
* https://github.com/stuartsierra/component




## Practice
* https://github.com/cemerick/clojure-type-selection-flowchart/
* https://github.com/Prismatic/eng-practices/blob/master/clojure/20130926-data-representation.md




## Keywords
* type

* defprotocol
* deftype
* defrecord
* definterface
* rerify

* extend
* extend-type
* extend-protocol
* extenders

* extends?
* satisfies?
* intance?

* ^:volatile-mutable
* ^:unsynchronized-mutable
* :impls

* gen-class

* ->CustomType
* map->CustomType
* CustomType/create



## defprotocol
* protocol is type-based single dispatch
* defprotocol
 - 주의. destructuring or rest arguments 를 사용하지 못함.
 * java interaface, clojure protocol
  - 프로토콜이 정의되는 시점에서 프로토콜 메소드는 일반 함수로 존재한다는 점에서 프로토콜은 인터페이스와 다르다.


```clojure
(defprotocol ITest
  (hello [this]))


  {:on protocols.core.ITest, :on-interface protocols.core.ITest, :sigs {:hello {:name hello, :arglists ([this]), :doc nil}}, :var #'protocols.core/ITest, :method-map {:hello :hello}, :method-builders {#'protocols.core/hello #object[protocols.core$eval15688$fn__15689 0x14d455f2 "protocols.core$eval15688$fn__15689@14d455f2"]}}

```


## Defining Your Own Types p270

* deftype, defrecord 공통.



```clojure
;; clojure의 type이 자바 class로 컴파일 되므로, 이름을 CamelCase로 짓는다.

(defrecord Point [x y])
(deftype Point [x y])
(.x (Point. 3 4))
;= 3
```


```clojure
;; var가 아닌, host 클래스이므로, 정의된 type을 명시적으로 import해야한다.

(def x "hello")
;= #'user/hello
(defrecord Point [x y])
;= user.Point
(Point. 5 5)
;= #user.Point{:x 5, :y 5}
(ns user2)
(refer 'user)
x
;= "hello"
Point
;= CompilerException java.lang.Exception:
;= Unable to resolve symbol: Point
(import 'user.Point)
Point
;= user.Point
```




```clojure

(defrecord NamedPoint [^String name ^long x ^long y])
(NamedPoint/getBasis)
;= [name x y]
(map meta (NamedPoint/getBasis))
;= ({:tag String} {:tag long} {:tag long})
```




## Types p277

* While immutable fields are public, mutable fields are always private and only accessible from within method bodies provided inline with the type definition.

```clojure
(deftype Point [x y])
;= user.Point
(.x (Point. 3 4))
;= 3
(:x (Point. 3 4))
;= nil
```

* `volatile` here has the same meaning as the volatile field modifier in Java: reads and writes are atomic12 and must be executed in program order; i.e., they cannot be reordered by the JIT compiler or by the CPU. Volatiles are thus unsurprising and threadsafe — but uncoordinated and still entirely open to race conditions.
* an `unsynchronized` field is a "regular" Java mutable field whose use will be thread-safe only under the guard of a lock or in the most expert of hands.





## Records p272

* 사실, defrecord는 deftype을 이용해서 만들어진 macro.


* Value semantics
* Full participation in the associative collection abstraction
* Metadata support
* Reader support, so instances of record types can be created by simply reading data
* An additional convenience constructor for creating records with metadata and auxiliary fields as desired




#### Records are associative collections.
```clojure
(:x (Point. 3 4))
;= 3
(:z (Point. 3 4) 0)
;= 0
(map :x [(Point. 3 4)
(Point. 5 6)
(Point. 7 8)])
;= (3 5 7)


(:z (assoc (Point. 3 4) :z 5))
;= 5
(.z (assoc (Point. 3 4) :z 5))
;= #<java.lang.IllegalArgumentException:
;= No matching field found: z for class user.Point>
```



#### Metadata support.
```clojure
(-> (Point. 3 4)
(with-meta {:foo :bar})
meta)
;= {:foo :bar}
```


#### Readable representation.
```clojure
(pr-str (assoc (Point. 3 4) :z [:a :b]))
;= "#user.Point{:x 3, :y 4, :z [:a :b]}"
(= (read-string *1)
(assoc (Point. 3 4) :z [:a :b]))
```

#### Auxiliary constructor.
```clojure
(Point. 3 4 {:foo :bar} {:z 5})
;= #user.Point{:x 3, :y 4, :z 5}
(meta *1)
;= {:foo :bar}
```

```clojure
(-> (Point. 3 4)
(with-meta {:foo :bar})
(assoc :z 5))
```


#### Constructors and factory functions
```clojure
(->Point 3 4)
;= #user.Point{:x 3, :y 4}

(map->Point {:x 3, :y 4, :z 5})
;= #user.Point{:x 3, :y 4, :z 5}

(map (partial apply ->Point) [[5 6] [7 8] [9 10]])
;= (#user.Point{:x 5, :y 6}
;= #user.Point{:x 7, :y 8}
;= #user.Point{:x 9, :y 10})
(map map->Point [{:x 1 :y 2} {:x 5 :y 6 :z 44}])
;= (#user.Point{:x 1, :y 2}
;= #user.Point{:x 5, :y 6, :z 44})


(Point/create {:x 3, :y 4, :z 5})
;= #user.Point{:x 3, :y 4, :z 5}
```





####  defrecord automatically provides implementations, including java.util.Map, java.io.Serializable, clojure.lang.IPersistentMap

```clojure
(defprotocol ClashWhenInlined
  (size [x]))

(defrecord R []
  ClashWhenInlined
  (size [x])) ; duplicate name error because the record implements a few standard interfaces, e.g. java.util.Map

(defrecord R [])

(extend-type R
  ClashWhenInlined
  (size [x])) ; no problem at all & and online updatable
```



## Implementing Protocols p280

1. Provide implementations for protocol methods when a type is initially defined via `deftype` or `defrecord`; this is called inline implementation.
2. Use the extend* functions to register implementations for a type with the protocol.

```clojure
;; while when you provide inline implementations, you can directly refer to field values by their name since they are in the lexical scope.

(defprotocol ITest
  (hello [this]))

(defrecord RecordA [msg]
  ITest
  (hello [this]
    (println msg)))


(defrecord RecordB [msg])
(extend-type RecordB
  ITest
  (hello [this]
    (println (:msg this))))
```


## Inline Implementation p281
Generally, inline implementations provide better performance for two reasons:

 * they have direct access to the type’s fields, and calling protocol methods will be as fast as calling an interface method in Java.
 * Because each protocol is backed by a Java interface, implementing a protocol’s methods inline results in a class that implements the protocol’s corresponding interface, where you define that class’s method bodies in those inline implementations.

```
All is well when we use extend-type to register an implementation for our record
type with the protocol, because that extension does not impact the construction of
the R type—it isn’t retroactively modified to implement the interface backing the
protocol.
```


Besides defrecord and deftype there is one other construct that accepts inline implementations:
reify.

Instances created by reify form closures, leaving method implementation bodies with
direct access to any local in the lexical scope.
(reify
Protocol-or-Interface-or-Object
(method1 [this x]
(implementation))
Another-Protocol-or-Interface
(method2 [this x y]
(implementation))
(method3 [this x]
(implementation)))

* reify is simpler: its method implementations are “baked in” just like those provided to deftype and defrecord forms, so dynamic updates are not directly supported.
* reify is more limited: it can only satisfy protocols and implement methods of Java interfaces and Object. Concrete classes may not be subclassed, whether they are abstract or not.
* Because all of reify’s method implementations are inlined into the host class, calls to those methods have zero overhead.



## Extending to Existing Types p266

extend
extend-protocol
extend-type




## Reusing Implementations p285

(defrecord Point [x y])
(extend Point
Matrix
{:lookup (fn [pt i j]
(when (zero? j)
(case i
0 (:x pt)
1 (:y pt))))
:update (fn [pt i j value]
(if (zero? j)
(condp = i
0 (Point. value (:y pt))
1 (Point. (:x pt) value))
pt))
:rows (fn [pt]
[[(:x pt)] [(:y pt)]])
:cols (fn [pt]
[[(:x pt) (:y pt)]])
:dims (fn [pt] [2 1]))


(def abstract-matrix-impl
{:cols (fn [pt]
(let [[h w] (dims pt)]
(map
(fn [x] (map #(lookup pt x y) (range 0 w)))
(range 0 h))))
:rows (fn [pt]
(apply map vector (cols pt)))})




(extend Point
Matrix
(assoc abstract-matrix-impl
:lookup (fn [pt i j]
(when (zero? j)
(case i
0 (:x pt)
1 (:y pt))))
:update (fn [pt i j value]
(if (zero? j)
(condp = i
0 (Point. value (:y pt))
1 (Point. (:x pt) value))
pt))
:dims (fn [pt] [2 1])))





(defprotocol Measurable
"A protocol for retrieving the dimensions of widgets."
(width [measurable] "Returns the width in px.")
(height [measurable] "Returns the height in px."))


(defrecord Button [text])
(extend-type Button
Measurable
(width [btn]
(* 8 (-> btn :text count)))
(height [btn] 8))
(def bordered
{:width #(* 2 (:border-width %))
:height #(* 2 (:border-height %))})

Measurable
;= {:impls
;= {user.Button
;= {:height #<user$eval2056$fn__2057 user$eval2056$fn__2057@112f8578>,
;= :width #<user$eval2056$fn__2059 user$eval2056$fn__2059@74b90ff7>}},
;= :on-interface user.Measurable,
;= :on user.Measurable,
;= :doc "A protocol for retrieving the 2D dimensions of widgets.",
;= :sigs
;= {:height
;= {:doc "Returns the height in px.",
;= :arglists ([measurable]),
;= :name height},
;= :width
;= {:doc "Returns the width in px.",
;= :arglists ([measurable]),
;= :name width}},
;= :var #'user/Measurable,
;= :method-map {:width :width, :height :height},
;= :method-builders
;= {#'user/height #<user$eval2012$fn__2013 user$eval2012$fn__2013@27aa7aac>,
;= #'user/width #<user$eval2012$fn__2024 user$eval2012$fn__2024@4848268a>}}



(get-in Measurable [:impls Button])
;= {:height #<user$eval1251$fn__1252 user$eval1251$fn__1252@744589eb>,
;= :width #<user$eval1251$fn__1254 user$eval1251$fn__1254@40735f45>}


(defn combine
"Takes two functions f and g and returns a fn that takes a variable number
of args, applies them to f and g and then returns the result of
(op rf rg) where rf and rg are the results of the calls to f and g."
[op f g]
(fn [& args]
(op (apply f args) (apply g args))))


(defrecord BorderedButton [text border-width border-height])
(extend BorderedButton
Measurable
(merge-with (partial combine +)
(get-in Measurable [:impls Button])
bordered))


(let [btn (Button. "Hello World")]
[(width btn) (height btn)])
;= [88 8]
(let [bbtn (BorderedButton. "Hello World" 6 4)]
[(width bbtn) (height bbtn)])
;= [100 16]




## Protocol Introspection p289

```clojure
(extenders Measurable)
;= (user.BorderedButton user.Button)

(extends? Measurable Button)
;= true

(satisfies? Measurable (Button. "hello"))
;= true
(satisfies? Measurable :other-value)
;= false

(instance? user.Measurable (Foo. 5 5))
;= true
```






## Protocol Dispatch Edge Cases p290

Competing implementations.
 The fact that protocols can be extended at any time
and at runtime is a huge boon to interactive development and for allowing protocol
implementations to evolve to accommodate tricky modeling or optimization problems.
 However, if two implementations of the same protocol for the same type exist,
then the last implementation that was loaded will replace the first—potentially to surprising
effect if the implementation you expect happens to be loaded first.
Alas, this is a problem of policy rather than technology! The rule of thumb to avoid
such conflicts is: if you are neither the protocol or type owner, be prepared to retract
your implementation. The potential conflict between the two owners is usually settled
by chronology: when the protocol predates the type, it’s the type owner’s responsibility
to extend the protocol and vice versa.


Class hierarchies break “ties” when possible.
(defprotocol P
(a [x]))
;= P
(extend-protocol P
java.util.Collection
(a [x] :collection!)
java.util.List
(a [x] :list!))
;= nil
(a [])
;= :list!



Unresolvable “ties” choose an arbitrary implementation.
(defprotocol P
(a [x]))
(extend-protocol P
java.util.Map
(a [x] :map!)
java.io.Serializable
(a [x] :serializable!))

(a {})
;= :serializable!


1. Extend the protocol to concrete types that you know you want to support. There
is never any ambiguity of dispatch between concrete types.
2. Wanting to extend multiple unrelated high-level interfaces to a protocol may be a
sign of a design problem, where the contract of the protocol is too broad. Revisit
that contract.
3. Use multimethods. In contrast to protocols, multimethods do fail with an error if
a call results in an unresolvable tie between dispatch values. Further, multimethods
provide a “preference” mechanism that can be used to specify how to resolve such
ambiguity.





#### When to use maps or records

Maps are the simplest way to get started writing code and modeling data because maps
do not force you to predefine any types or schema at all, thus giving you more conceptual
latitude when prototyping a feature.

However, as soon as you perceive the need
for type-based polymorphism (available via protocols for records and types) or performance-
sensitive field access, you can switch to records and be done: most of your code
(if not all) will work as is because of the abstractions shared between maps and records


One pitfall when switching from maps to records is that records are not functions.
Another trap is that maps and records can never be equal,



## Final Thoughts p299

Types, records, and protocols together shape a potent framework that puts the focus
on data and avoids extraneous ceremony and complexity. This data-centric approach
to types and abstractions allows us to model domains and interactions more faithfully,
apply the whole language to those models—such as how we can work with records and
maps in a uniform way using the core collection and associative abstractions and functions—
and helps us to avoid having to make false choices due to often unnecessary
complexities like class hierarchies.
